
STRUGGLING UPWARD by HORATIO ALGER JR.

Digitized by Cardinalis Etext Press [C.E.K.]
Posted to Wiretap in August 1993, as strugup.txt.

Italics are represented as _italics_.

This text is in the PUBLIC DOMAIN.

----

From the book "Ragged Dick and Struggling Upward", published
by Penguin Books, 1985. Ragged Dick was first published in the
United States by A.K. Loring, 1868. The Introduction written
by Carl Bode is not included in this etext, and is (c)1985 by
Viking Penguin, Inc., all rights reserved. The text itself
is not copyright, and this etext is public domain.

STRUGGLING UPWARD

CHAPTER I
THE WATERBURY WATCH

One Saturday afternoon in January a lively and animated
group of boys were gathered on the western side of a large pond
in the village of Groveton.  Prominent among them was a tall,
pleasant-looking young man of twenty-two, the teacher of the
Center Grammar School, Frederic Hooper, A.B., a recent graduate
of Yale College.  Evidently there was something of importance
on foot.  What it was may be learned from the words of the teacher.

"Now, boys," he said, holding in his hand a Waterbury watch,
of neat pattern, "I offer this watch as a prize to the boy who will
skate across the pond and back in the least time.  You will all
start together, at a given signal, and make your way to the mark
which I have placed at the western end of the lake, skate around
it, and return to this point.  Do you fully understand?"

"Yes, sir!" exclaimed the boys, unanimously.

Before proceeding, it may be well to refer more particularly
to some of the boys who were to engage in the contest.

First, in his own estimation, came Randolph Duncan, son
of Prince Duncan, president of the Groveton Bank, and a
prominent town official.  Prince Duncan was supposed to be
a rich man, and lived in a style quite beyond that of his neighbors. 
Randolph was his only son, a boy of sixteen, and felt that in
social position and blue blood he was without a peer in the village. 
He was a tall, athletic boy, and disposed to act the part of boss
among the Groveton boys.

Next came a boy similar in age and physical strength, but
in other respects very different from the young aristocrat. 
This was Luke Larkin, the son of a carpenter's widow, living on
narrow means, and so compelled to exercise the strictest economy. 
Luke worked where he could, helping the farmers in hay-time,
and ready to do odd jobs for any one in the village who desired
his services.  He filled the position of janitor at the school
which he attended, sweeping out twice a week and making the fires. 
He had a pleasant expression, and a bright, resolute look,
a warm heart, and a clear intellect, and was probably, in spite
of his poverty, the most popular boy in Groveton.  In this respect
he was the opposite of Randolph Duncan, whose assumption of
superiority and desire to "boss" the other boys prevented him
from having any real friends.  He had two or three companions,
who flattered him and submitted to his caprices because they
thought it looked well to be on good terms with the young aristocrat.

These two boys were looked upon as the chief contestants
for the prize offered by their teacher.  Opinions differed as to
which would win.

"I think Luke will get the watch," said Fred Acken, a younger boy.

"I don't know about that," said Tom Harper.  "Randolph skates
just as well, and he has a pair of club skates.  His father sent
to New York for them last week.  They're beauties, I tell you. 
Randolph says they cost ten dollars."

"Of course that gives him the advantage," said Percy Hall. 
"Look at Luke's old-fashioned wooden skates!  They would be
dear at fifty cents!"

"It's a pity Luke hasn't a better pair," said Harry Wright. 
"I don't think the contest is a fair one.  Luke ought to have an
allowance of twenty rods, to make up for the difference in skates."

"He wouldn't accept it," said Linton Tomkins, the son of
a manufacturer in Groveton, who was an intimate friend of Luke,
and preferred to associate with him, though Randolph had made
advances toward intimacy, Linton being the only boy in the
village whom he regarded as his social equal.  "I offered him my
club skates, but he said he would take the chances with his own."

Linton was the only boy who had a pair of skates equal to Randolph's. 
He, too, was a contestant, but, being three years younger than
Luke and Randolph, had no expectation of rivaling them.

Randolph had his friends near him, administering the adulation
he so much enjoyed.

"I have no doubt you'll get the watch, Randolph," said Sam Noble. 
"You're a better skater any day than Luke Larkin."

"Of course you are!" chimed in Tom Harper.

"The young janitor doesn't think so," said Randolph, his lips curling.

"Oh, he's conceited enough to think he can beat you, I make
no doubt," said Sam.

"On those old skates, too!  They look as if Adam might have
used them when he was a boy!"

This sally of Tom's created a laugh.

"His skates are old ones, to be sure," said Randolph, who was
quick-sighted enough to understand that any remark of this kind
might dim the luster of his expected victory.  "His skates are old
enough, but they are just as good for skating as mine."

"They won't win him the watch, though," said Sam.

"I don't care for the watch myself," said Randolph, loftily. 
"I've got a silver one now, and am to have a gold one when
I'm eighteen.  But I want to show that I am the best skater. 
Besides, father has promised me ten dollars if I win."

"I wish I had ten dollars," said Sam, enviously.

He was the son of the storekeeper, and his father allowed
him only ten cents a week pocket-money, so that ten dollars in
his eyes was a colossal fortune. 

"I have no doubt you would, Sam," said Tom, joyously; "but
you couldn't be trusted with so much money.  You'd go down
to New York and try to buy out A. T. Stewart."

"Are you ready, boys?" asked Mr. Hooper.

Most of the boys responded promptly in the affirmative; but Luke,
who had been tightening his straps, said quickly:  "I am not ready,
Mr. Hooper.  My strap has broken!"

"Indeed, Luke, I am sorry to hear it," said the teacher,
approaching and examining the fracture.  "As matters stand,
you can't skate."

Randolph's eyes brightened.  Confident as he professed to
feel, he knew that his chances of success would be greatly
increased by Luke's withdrawal from the list.

"The prize is yours now," whispered Tom.

"It was before," answered Randolph, conceitedly.

Poor Luke looked disappointed.  He knew that he had at least an
even chance of winning, and he wanted the watch.  Several of his
friends of his own age had watches, either silver or Waterbury,
and this seemed, in his circumstances, the only chance of
securing one.  Now he was apparently barred out.

"It's a pity you shouldn't skate, Luke," said Mr. Hooper, in
a tone of sympathy.  "You are one of the best skaters, and had
an excellent chance of winning the prize.  Is there any boy
willing to lend Luke his skates?"

"I will," said Frank Acken.

"My dear boy," said the teacher, "you forget that your feet
are several sizes smaller than Luke's."

"I didn't think of that," replied Frank, who was only twelve
years old.

"You may use my skates, Luke," said Linton Tomkins. 
"I think they will fit you."

Linton was only thirteen, but he was unusually large for his age.

"You are very kind, Linton," said Luke, "but that will keep
you out of the race."

"I stand no chance of winning," said Linton, "and I will
do my skating afterward."

"I don't think that fair," said Randolph, with a frown. 
"Each boy ought to use his own skates."

"There is nothing unfair about it," said the teacher, "except
that luke is placed at disadvantage in using a pair of skates
he is unaccustomed to."

Randolph did not dare gainsay the teacher, but he looked sullen.

"Mr. Hooper is always favoring that beggar!" he said in a
low voice, to Tom Harper.

"Of course he is!" chimed in the toady.

"You are very kind, Linny," said Luke, regarding his friend
affectionately.  "I won't soon forget it."

"Oh, it's all right, Luke," said Linton.  "Now go in and win!"

CHAPTER II
TOM HARPER'S ACCIDENT

Tom Harper and Sam Noble were not wholly disinterested
in their championship of Randolph.  They were very ordinary
skaters, and stood no chance of winning the match themselves. 
They wished Randolph to win, for each hoped, as he had a
silver watch himself already, he might give the Waterbury to
his faithful friend and follower.  Nothing in Randolph's
character granted such a hope, for he was by no means generous
or openhanded, but each thought that he might open his heart
on this occasion.  Indeed, Tom ventured to hint as much.

"I suppose, Randolph," he said, "if you win the watch you
will give it to me?"

"Why should I?" asked Randolph, surveying Tom with a
cold glance.

"You've got a nice silver watch yourself, you know."

"I might like to have two watches."

"You'll have the ten dollars your father promised you."

"What if I have?  What claim have you on me?"

Tom drew near and whispered something in Randolph's ear.

"I'll see about it," said Randolph, nodding.

"Are you ready?" asked the teacher, once more.

"Aye, aye!" responded the boys.

"One--two--three--go!"

The boys darted off like arrows from a bow.  Luke made
a late start, but before they were half across the pond he was
even with Randolph, and both were leading.  Randolph looked
sidewise, and shut his mouth tight as he saw his hated rival on
equal terms with him and threatening to pass him.  It would be
humiliating in the extreme, he thought, to be beaten by such a boy.

But beaten he seemed likely to be, for Luke was soon a rod
in advance and slowly gaining.  Slowly, for Randolph was really
a fine skater and had no rival except Luke.  But Luke was his
superior, as seemed likely to be proved.

Though only these two stood any chance of final success,
all the boys kept up the contest.

A branch of a tree had been placed at the western end of the
pond, and this was the mark around which the boys were to skate. 
Luke made the circuit first, Randolph being about half a dozen
rods behind.  After him came the rest of the boys in procession,
with one exception.  This exception was Tom Harper, who apparently
gave up the contest when half-way across, and began skating about,
here and there, apparently waiting for his companions to return.

"Tom Harper has given up his chance," said Linton to the teacher.

"So it seems," replied Mr. Hooper, "but he probably had
no expectation of succeeding."

"I should think he would have kept on with the rest.  I would
have done so, though my chance would have been no better than his."

Indeed, it seemed strange that Tom should have given up
so quickly.  It soon appeared that it was not caprice, but that
he had an object in view, and that a very discreditable one.

He waited till the boys were on their way back.  By this time
Luke was some eight rods in advance of his leading competitor. 
Then Tom began to be on the alert.  As Luke came swinging on to
victory he suddenly placed himself in his way.  Luke's speed
was so great that he could not check himself.  He came into
collision with Tom, and in an instant both were prostrate. 
Tom, however, got the worst of it.  He was thrown violently
backward, falling on the back of his head, and lay stunned
and motionless on the ice.  Luke fell over him, but was
scarcely hurt at all.  He was up agiin in an instant, and might
still have kept the lead, but instead he got down on his knees
beside Tom and asked anxiously:  "Are you much hurt, Tom?"

Tom didn't immediately answer, but lay breathing heavily,
with his eyes still closed.

Meanwhile, Randolph, with a smile of triumph, swept on to
his now assured victory.  Most of the boys, however, stopped and
gathered round Luke and Tom.

This accident had been watched with interest and surprise
from the starting-point.

"Tom must be a good deal hurt," said Linton.  "What could
possibly have made him get in Luke's way?"

"I don't know," said the teacher, slowly; "it looks strange."

"It almost seemed as if he got in the way on purpose,"
Linton continued.

"He is a friend of Randolph Duncan, is he not?" asked the
teacher, abruptly.

"They are together about all the time."

"Ha!" commented the teacher, as if struck by an idea.  He didn't,
however, give expression to the thought in his mind. 

A minute more, and Randolph swept into the presence of the teacher.

"I believe I have won?" he said, with a smile of gratification
on his countenance.

"You have come in first," said the teacher coldly.

"Luke was considerably ahead when he ran into Tom," suggested Linton.

"That's not my lookout," said Randolph, shrugging his shoulders. 
"The point is that I have come in first."

"Tom Harper is a friend of yours, is he not?" asked the teacher.

"Oh, yes!" answered Randolph, indifferently.

"He seems to be a good deal hurt.  It was very strange that
he got in Luke's way."

"So it was," said Randolph, without betraying much interest.

"Will you lend me your skates, Randolph?" asked Linton. 
"I should like to go out and see if I can help Tom in any way."

If any other boy than Linton had made the request, Randolph
would have declined, but he wished, if possible, to add
Linton to his list of friends, and graciously consented.

Before Linton could reach the spot, Tom had been assisted to
his feet, and, with a dazed expression, assisted on either side
by Luke and Edmund Blake, was on his way back to the starting-point.

"What made you get in my way, Tom?" asked Luke, puzzled.

"I don't know," answered Tom, sullenly.

"Are you much hurt?"

"I think my skull must be fractured," moaned Tom.

"Oh, not so bad as that," said Luke, cheerfully.  "I've fallen
on my head myself, but I got over it."

"You didn't fall as hard as I did," groaned Tom.

"No, I presume not; but heads are hard, and I guess you'll
be all right in a few days."

Tom had certainly been severely hurt.  There was a swelling
on the back of his head almost as large as a hen's egg.

"You've lost the watch, Luke," said Frank Acken. 
"Randolph has got in first."

"Yes, I supposed he would," answered Luke, quietly.

"And there is Linton Tomkins coming to meet us on Randolph's skates."

"Randolph is sitting down on a log taking it easy.  What is your
loss, Luke, is his gain."

"Yes."

"I think he might have come back to inquire after you, Tom,
as you are a friend of his."

Tom looked resentfully at Randolph, and marked his complacent
look, and it occurred to him also that the friend he had
risked so much to serve was very ungrateful.  But he hoped now,
at any rate, to get the watch, and thought it prudent to say nothing.

The boys had now reached the shore.

"Hope you're not much hurt, Tom?" said Randolph, in a tone
of mild interest.

"I don't know but my skull is fractured," responded Tom, bitterly.

"Oh, I guess not.  It's the fortune of war.  Well, I got in first."

Randolph waited for congratulations, but none came.  All the
boys looked serious, and more than one suspected that there
had been foul play.  They waited for the teacher to speak.

CHAPTER III
RANDOLPH GETS THE WATCH

"It is true," said the teacher, slowly.  "Randolph has won the race."

Randolph's face lighted up with exultation.

"But it is also evident," continued Mr. Hooper, "that he would
not have succeeded but for the unfortunate collision between Luke
Larkin and Tom Harper."

Here some of Luke's friends brightened up.

"I don't know about that," said Randolph.  "At any rate, I
came in first."

"I watched the race closely," said the teacher, "and I have
no doubt on the subject.  Luke had so great a lead that he would
surely have won the race."

"But he didn't," persisted Randolph, doggedly

"He did not, as we all know.  It is also clear that had he not
stopped to ascertain the extent of Tom's injuries he still might
have won."

"That's so!" said half a dozen boys.

"Therefore I cannot accept the result as indicating the
superiority of the successful contestant."

"I think I am entitled to the prize," said Randolph.

"I concede that; but, under the circumstances, I suggest to
you that it would be graceful and proper to waive your claim
and try the race over again."

The boys applauded, with one or two exceptions.

"I won't consent to that, Mr. Hooper," said Randolph, frowning. 
"I've won the prize fairly and I want it."

"I am quite willing Randolph should have it, sir," said Luke. 
"I think I should have won it if I had not stopped with Tom, but
that doesn't affect the matter one way or the other.  Randolph
came in first, as he says, and I think he is entitled to the watch."

"Then," said Mr. Hooper, gravely, "there is nothing more to
be said.  Randolph, come forward and receive the prize."

Randolph obeyed with alacrity, and received the Waterbury
watch from the hands of Mr. Hooper.  The boys stood in silence
and offered no congratulations.

"Now, let me say," said the teacher, "that I cannot understand
why there was any collision at all.  Tom Harper, why did you get
in Luke's way?"

"Because I was a fool, sir," answered Tom, smarting from
his injuries, and the evident indifference of Randolph,
in whose cause he had incurred them.

"That doesn't answer my question.  Why did you act like a
fool, as you expressed it?"

"I thought I could get out of the way in time," stammered
Tom, who did not dare to tell the truth.

"You had no other reason?" asked the teacher, searchingly.

"No, sir.  What other reason could I have?" said Tom, but
his manner betrayed confusion.

"Indeed, I don't know," returned the teacher, quietly. 
"Your action, however, spoiled Luke's chances and insured
the success of Randolph."

"And got me a broken head," muttered Tom, placing his hand
upon the swelling at the back of his head.

"Yes, you got the worst of it.  I advise you to go home and
apply cold water or any other remedy your mother may suggest."

Randolph had already turned away, meaning to return home. 
Tom joined him.  Randolph would gladly have dispensed with his
company, but had no decent excuse, as Tom's home lay in the
same direction as his.

"Well, Randolph, you've won the watch," said Tom, when
they were out of hearing of the other boys.

"Yes," answered Randolph, indifferently.  "I don't care so much
for that as for the ten dollars my father is going to give me."

"That's what I thought.  You've got another watch, you
know--more valuable."

"Well, what of it?" said Randolph, suspiciously.

"I think you might give me the Waterbury.  I haven't got any."

"Why should I give it to you?" answered Randolph, coldly.

"Because but for me you wouldn't have won it, nor the ten
dollars, neither."

"How do you make that out?"

"The teacher said so himself."

"I don't agree to it."

"You can't deny it.  Luke was seven or eight rods ahead when
I got in his way."

"Then it was lucky for me."

"It isn't lucky for me.  My head hurts awfully."

"I'm very sorry, of course."

"That won't do me any good.  Come, Randolph, give me the
watch, like a good fellow."

"Well, you've got cheek, I must say.  I want the watch myself."

"And is that all the satisfaction I am to get for my broken
head?" exclaimed Tom, indignantly.

Randolph was a thoroughly mean boy, who, if he had had a dozen
watches, would have wished to keep them all for himself.

"I've a great mind to tell Luke and the teacher of the arrangement
between us."

"There wasn't any arrangement," said Randolph, sharply. 
"However, as I'm really sorry for you, I am willing to give you
a quarter.  There, now, don't let me hear any more about the matter."

He drew a silver quarter from his vest pocket and tendered
it to Tom.

Tom Harper was not a sensitive boy, but his face flushed with
indignation and shame, and he made no offer to take the money.

"Keep your quarter, Randolph Duncan," he said scornfully.  "I think
you're the meanest specimen of a boy that I ever came across. 
Any boy is a fool to be your friend.  I don't care to keep
company with you any longer."

"This to me!" exclaimed Randolph, angrily.  "This is the
pay I get for condescending to let you go with me."

"You needn't condescend any longer," said Tom, curtly, and
he crossed to the other side of the street.

Randolph looked after him rather uneasily.  After all, he was
sorry to lose his humble follower.

"He'll be coming round in a day or two to ask me to take
him back," he reflected.  "I would be willing to give him ten
cents more, but as for giving him the watch, he must think me
a fool to part with that."

CHAPTER IV
LUKE'S NIGHT ADVENTURE

"I am sorry you have lost the watch, Luke," said the teacher,
after Randolph's departure.  "You will have to be satisfied with
deserving it."

"I am reconciled to the disappointment, sir," answered Luke. 
"I can get along for the present without a watch."

Nevertheless, Luke did feel disappointed.  He had fully expected
to have the watch to carry home and display to his mother. 
As it was, he was in no hurry to go home, but remained for two
hours skating with the other boys.  He used his friend Linton's
skates, Linton having an engagement which prevented his remaining.

It was five o'clock when Luke entered the little cottage which
he called home.  His mother, a pleasant woman of middle age,
was spreading the cloth for supper.  She looked up as he entered.

"Well, Luke?" she said inquiringly.

"I haven't brought home the watch, mother," he said. 
"Randolph Duncan won it by accident.  I will tell you about it."

After he had done so, Mrs. Larkin asked thoughtfully.  "Isn't it
a little singular that Tom should have got in your way?"

"Yes; I thought so at the time."

"Do you think there was any arrangement between him and Randolph?"

"As you ask me, mother, I am obliged to say that I do."

"It was a very mean trick!" said Mrs. Larkin, resentfully.

"Yes, it was; but poor Tom was well punished for it.  Why, he's
got a bunch on the back of his head almost as large as a hen's egg."

"I don't pity him," said Mrs. Larkin.

"I pity him, mother, for I don't believe Randolph will repay
him for the service done him.  If Randolph had met with the
same accident I am not prepared to say that I should have pitied
him much."

"You might have been seriously injured yourself, Luke."

"I might, but I wasn't, so I won't take that into consideration. 
However, mother, watch or no watch, I've got a good appetite. 
I shall be ready when supper is."

Luke sat down to the table ten minutes afterward and proved
his words good, much to his mother's satisfaction.

While he is eating we will say a word about the cottage.  It was
small, containing only four rooms, furnished in the plainest fashion. 
The rooms, however, were exceedingly neat, and presented an appearance
of comfort.  Yet the united income of Mrs. Larkin and Luke was
very small.  Luke received a dollar a week for taking care of the
schoolhouse, but this income only lasted forty weeks in the year. 
Then he did odd jobs for the neighbors, and picked up perhaps
as much more.  Mrs. Larkin had some skill as a dressmaker,
but Groveton was a small village, and there was another in the
same line, so that her income from this source probably did not
average more than three dollars a week.  This was absolutely
all that they had to live on, though there was no rent to pay;
and the reader will not be surprised to learn that Luke had no
money to spend for watches.

"Are you tired, Luke?" asked his mother, after supper.

"No, mother.  Can I do anything for you?"

"I have finished a dress for Miss Almira Clark.  I suppose
she will want to wear it to church tomorrow.  But she lives
so far away, I don't like to ask you to carry it to her."

"Oh, I don't mind.  It won't do me any harm."

"You will get tired."

"If I do, I shall sleep the better for it."

"You are a good son, Luke."

"I ought to be.  Haven't I got a good mother?"

So it was arranged.  About seven o'clock, after his chores
were done--for there was some wood to saw and split--Luke set
out, with the bundle under his arm, for the house of Miss Clark,
a mile and a half away.

It was a commonplace errand, that on which Luke had started,
but it was destined to be a very important day in his life.  It was
to be a turning-point, and to mark the beginning of a new chapter
of experiences.  Was it to be for good or ill?  That we are not
prepared to reveal.  It will be necessary for the reader to follow
his career, step by step, and decide for himself.

Of course, Luke had no thought of this when he set out.  To him
it had been a marked day on account of the skating match,
but this had turned out a disappointment.  He accomplished his
errand, which occupied a considerable time, and then set out on
his return.  It was half-past eight, but the moon had risen and
diffused a mild radiance over the landscape.  Luke thought he
would shorten his homeward way by taking a path through the woods. 
It was not over a quarter of a mile, but would shorten the
distance by as much more.  The trees were not close together,
so that it was light enough to see.  Luke had nearly reached the
edge of the wood, when he overtook a tall man, a stranger in the
neighborhood, who carried in his hand a tin box.  Turning, he
eyed Luke sharply.

"Boy, what's your name?" he asked.

"Luke Larkin," our hero answered, in surprise.

"Where do you live?"

"In the village yonder."

"Will you do me a favor?"

"What is it, sir?"

"Take this tin box and carry it to your home.  Keep it under
lock and key till I call for it."

"Yes, sir, I can do that.  But how shall I know you again?"

"Take a good look at me, that you may remember me."

"I think I shall know you again, but hadn't you better give
me a name?"

"Well, perhaps so," answered the other, after a moment's thought. 
"You may call me Roland Reed.  Will you remember?"

"Yes, sir."

"I am obliged to leave this neighhorhood at once, and can't
conveniently carry the box," explained the stranger. 
"Here's something for your trouble."

Luke was about to say that he required no money, when it
occurred to him that he had no right to refuse, since money was
so scarce at home.  He took the tin box and thrust the bank-bill
into his vest pocket.  He wondered how much it was, but it was
too dark to distinguish.

"Good night!" said Luke, as the stranger turned away.

"Good night!" answered his new acquaintance, abruptly.

If Luke could have foreseen the immediate consequences of
this apparently simple act, and the position in which it would
soon place him, he would certainly have refused to take charge
of the box.  And yet in so doing it might have happened that
he had made a mistake.  The consequences of even our simple
acts are oftentimes far-reaching and beyond the power of human
wisdom to foreknow.

Luke thought little of this as, with the box under his arm, he
trudged homeward.

CHAPTER V
LUKE RECEIVES AN INVITATION

"What have you there, Luke?" asked Mrs. Larkin, as Luke
entered the little sitting-room with the tin box under his arm.

"I met a man on my way home, who asked me to keep it for him."

"Do you know the man?" asked his mother, in surprise.

"No," answered Luke.

"It seems very singular.  What did he say?"

"He said that he was obliged to leave the neighborhood at
once, and could not conveniently carry the box."

"Do you think it contains anything of value?"

"Yes, mother.  It is like the boxes rich men have to hold
their stocks and bonds.  I was at the bank one day, and saw
a gentleman bring in one to deposit in the safe."

"I can't understand that at all, Luke.  You say you did not
know this man?"

"I never met him before."

"And, of course, he does not know you?"

"No, for he asked my name."

"Yet he put what may be valuable property in your possession."

"I think," said Luke, shrewdly, "he had no one else to trust
it to.  Besides, a country boy wouldn't be very likely to make
use of stocks and bonds."

"No, that is true.  I suppose the tin box is locked?"

"Yes, mother.  The owner--he says his name is Roland
Reed--wishes it put under lock and key."

"I can lock it up in my trunk, Luke."

"I think that will be a good idea."

"I hope he will pay you for your trouble when he takes away
the tin box."

"He has already.  I forgot to mention it," and Luke drew from his
vest pocket, the bank-note he had thrust in as soon as received. 
"Why, it's a ten-dollar bill!" he exclaimed.  "I wonder whether
he knew he was giving me as much?"

"I presume so, Luke," said his mother, brightening up.  "You
are in luck!"

"Take it, mother.  You will find a use for it."

"But, Luke, this money is yours."

"No, it is yours, for you are going to take care of the box."

It was, indeed, quite a windfall, and both mother and son
retired to rest in a cheerful frame of mind, in spite of Luke's
failure in the race.

"I have been thinking, Luke," said his mother, at the
breakfast-table, "that I should like to have you buy a Waterbury
watch out of this money.  It will only cost three dollars and
a half, and that is only one-third."

"Thank you, mother, but I can get along without the watch. 
I cared for it chiefly because it was to be a prize given to the
best skater.  All the boys know that I would have won but for
the accident, and that satisfies me."

"I should like you to have a watch, Luke."

"There is another objection, mother.  I don't want any one
to know about the box or the money.  If it were known that we
had so much property in the house, some attempt might be made
to rob us."

"That is true, Luke.  But I hope it won't be long before you
have a watch of your own."

When Luke was walking, after breakfast, he met Randolph
Duncan, with a chain attached to the prize watch ostentatiously
displayed on the outside of his vest.  He smiled complacently, and
rather triumphantly, when he met Luke.  But Luke looked neither
depressed nor angry.

"I hope your watch keeps good time, Randolph," he said.

"Yes; it hasn't varied a minute so far.  I think it will keep
as good time as my silver watch."

"You are fortunate to have two watches."

"My father has promised me a gold watch when I am eighteen,"
said Randolph, pompously.

"I don't know if I shall have any watch at all when I am eighteen."

"Oh, well, you are a poor boy.  It doesn't matter to you."

"I don't know about that, Randolph.  Time is likely to be
of as much importance to a poor boy as to a rich boy."

"Oh, ah! yes, of course, but a poor boy isn't expected to wear
a watch."

Here the conversation ended.  Luke walked on with an
amused smile on his face.

"I wonder how it would seem to be as complacent and self-
satisfied as Randolph?" he thought.  "On the whole, I would
rather be as I am."

"Good morning, Luke!"

It was a girl's voice that addressed him.  Looking up, he met
the pleasant glance of Florence Grant, considered by many the
prettiest girl in Groveton.  Her mother was a widow in easy
circumstances, who had removed from Chicago three years before,
and occupied a handsome cottage nearly opposite Mr. Duncan's
residence.  She was a general favorite, not only for her good
looks, but on account of her pleasant manner and sweet disposition.

"Good morning, Florence," said Luke, with an answering smile.

"What a pity you lost the race yesterday!"

"Randolph doesn't think so."

"No; he is a very selfish boy, I am afraid."

"Did you see the race?" asked Luke.

"No, but I heard all about it.  If it hadn't been for Tom
Harper you would have won, wouldn't you?"

"I think so."

"All the boys say so.  What could have induced Tom to get in the way?"

"I don't know.  It was very foolish, however.  He got badly hurt."

"Tom is a friend of Randolph," said Florence significantly.

"Yes," answered Luke; "but I don't think Randolph would
stoop to such a trick as that."

"You wouldn't, Luke, but Randolph is a different boy. 
Besides, I hear he was trying for something else."

"I know; his father offered him ten dollars besides."

"I don't see why it is that some fare so much better than
others," remarked Florence, thoughtfully.  "The watch and the
money would have done you more good."

"So they would, Florence, but I don't complain.  I may be
better off some day than I am now."

"I hope you will, Luke," said Florence, cordially.

"I am very much obliged to you for your good wishes," said
Luke, warmly.

"That reminds me, Luke, next week, Thursday, is my birthday,
and I am to have a little party in the evening.  Will you come?"

Luke's face flushed with pleasure.  Though he knew Florence
very well from their being schoolfellows, he had never visited
the house.  He properly regarded the invitation as a compliment,
and as a mark of friendship from one whose good opinion he
highly valued.

"Thank you, Florence," he said.  "You are very kind, and I shall
have great pleasure in being present.  Shall you have many?"

"About twenty.  Your friend Randolph will be there."

"I think there will be room for both of us," said Luke, with
a smile.

The young lady bade him good morning and went on her way.

Two days later Luke met Randolph at the dry-goods store in
the village.

"What are you buying?" asked Randolph, condescendingly.

"Only a spool of thread for my mother."

"I am buying a new necktie to wear to Florence Grant's birthday
party," said Randolph, pompously.

"I think I shall have to do the same," said Luke, enjoying
the surprise he saw expressed on Randolph's face.

"Are you going?" demanded Randolph, abruptly.

"Yes."

"Have you been invited?"

"That is a strange question," answered Luke, indignantly. 
"Do you think I would go without an invitation?"

"Really, it will be quite a mixed affair," said Randolph,
shrugging his shoulders.

"If you think so, why do you go?"

"I don't want to disappoint Florence."

Luke smiled.  He was privately of the opinion that the
disappointment wouldn't be intense.

CHAPTER VI
PREPARING FOR THE PARTY

The evening of the party arrived.  It was quite a social event
at Groveton, and the young people looked forward to it with
pleasant anticipation.  Randolph went so far as to order a new
suit for the occasion.  He was very much afraid it would not be
ready in time, but he was not to be disappointed.  At five o'clock
on Thursday afternoon it was delivered, and Randolph, when
arrayed in it, surveyed himself with great satisfaction.  He had
purchased a handsome new necktie, and he reflected with pleasure
that no boy present--not even Linton--would be so handsomely
dressed as himself.  He had a high idea of his personal
consequence, but he was also of the opinion that "fine feathers
make fine birds," and his suit was of fine cloth and stylish make.

"I wonder what the janitor will wear?" he said to himself, with
a curl of the lip.  "A pair of overalls, perhaps.  They would
be very appropriate, certainly."

This was just the question which was occupying Luke's mind. 
He did not value clothes as Randolph did, but he liked to look neat. 
Truth to tell, he was not very well off as to wardrobe.  He had
his every-day suit, which he wore to school, and a better suit,
which he had worn for over a year.  It was of mixed cloth, neat
in appearance, though showing signs of wear; but there was one
trouble.  During the past year Luke had grown considerably, and
his coat-sleeves were nearly two inches too short, and the legs of
his trousers deficient quite as much.  Nevertheless, he dressed
himself, and he, too, surveyed himself, not before a pier-glass,
but before the small mirror in the kitchen.

"Don't my clothes look bad, mother?" he asked anxiously.

"They are neat and clean, Luke," said his mother, hesitatingly.

"Yes, I know; but they are too small."

"You have been growing fast in the last year, Luke," said
his mother, looking a little disturbed.  "I suppose you are
not sorry for that?"

"No," answered Luke, with a smile, "but I wish my coat and
trousers had grown, too."
